Audiobook Generator
This repository contains a standalone application for converting written
books into high‑quality audiobooks using a combination of a local
Large Language Model (LLM) and an advanced text‑to‑speech (TTS)
engine. The program runs entirely on a Windows PC and does not
require an internet connection once all models are downloaded. It
leverages LM Studio’s OpenAI‑compatible API for parsing the book into
a structured script and the Higgs Audio V2 model for expressive,
multi‑speaker audio synthesis.
lmstudio.ai
boson.ai

Features
Document Import: Accepts plain text files (.txt) and Microsoft
Word documents (.docx). The file is parsed into chapters using a
simple heading detection heuristic.

Local LLM Parsing: Sends each chapter to a model running in LM
Studio via the /v1/chat/completions endpoint. You can reuse
existing OpenAI clients by pointing the base_url to
http://localhost:1234/v1 
lmstudio.ai
. The model outputs a script in the
format Speaker: utterance with narrative text labelled
Narrator.

Voice Mapping: Automatically extracts a list of unique
speaker names from the script. You can attach a reference audio
snippet to each name, and these mappings are saved in a JSON file so
that characters keep consistent voices across different books. Higgs
Audio supports voice cloning and multi‑speaker dialogue generation
using optional reference clips
aimodels.fyi
.

Chunked Audio Synthesis: Long chapters are split at speaker or
sentence boundaries before synthesis. Splitting at natural
boundaries helps maintain fluid prosody and avoids the choppy
output that results from breaking sentences mid‑stream
developers.deepgram.com
.

Disk Space Check: Before writing audio files, the program
verifies that at least 2 GB of free space is available in the chosen
output folder.

User‑Friendly GUI: A PySide6 interface provides file and folder
pickers, model selection, a table for assigning voice samples, a
progress bar and log messages.

Requirements
Python 3.8 or later. You can download Python from
python.org.

LM Studio version 0.3.6 or newer. LM Studio is an offline
desktop application that can host open‑source LLMs and expose
them through an OpenAI‑compatible API
lmstudio.ai
.

Higgs Audio V2 model files. Boson AI has open‑sourced this
expressive, multi‑speaker audio model
boson.ai
. The base
model runs on an NVIDIA GPU and requires significant video memory
(at least a 4090 for the 3B model)
boson.ai
.

At least 16 GB of system RAM and sufficient disk space (audio
files can be large; ensure at least 2 GB free in your output
directory).

Installation
1. Install Python
Download and install Python 3.8 or later from
https://www.python.org/downloads. During installation on Windows,
make sure to check “Add Python to PATH”.

2. Create a virtual environment (optional but recommended)
Open a terminal (PowerShell or Command Prompt) and run:

bash
Copy
Edit
python -m venv env
env\Scripts\activate
This creates an isolated environment for Python packages. You can
deactivate it later with deactivate.

3. Install Python dependencies
Navigate to the repository folder and install the requirements:

bash
Copy
Edit
pip install -r requirements.txt
This installs PySide6 for the GUI, python‑docx for reading Word files,
requests for HTTP requests, soundfile/numpy for audio
processing, and other dependencies.

4. Install and configure LM Studio
Download LM Studio from https://lmstudio.ai and install it on your
system.

Start LM Studio and load a suitable model (e.g. Qwen‑7B or
Vicuna‑13B chat model). Larger models provide better parsing but
require more memory. Use the model manager in LM Studio to
download and load the model you prefer. You may need to
quantize the model to 4‑bit to fit within 16 GB of VRAM.

Enable the API server: open the Developer tab in LM Studio and
start the server, or run the command below in a terminal (requires
the lms CLI) to start the REST API on port 1234
lmstudio.ai
:

bash
Copy
Edit
lms server start
LM Studio exposes an OpenAI‑like API, so existing OpenAI clients can
be pointed at http://localhost:1234/v1 
lmstudio.ai
 without any other
changes. Ensure the server is running before launching the
audiobook generator.

5. Download and prepare Higgs Audio V2
Higgs Audio V2 is an open‑source audio foundation model capable of
expressive multi‑speaker speech and voice cloning
boson.ai
aimodels.fyi
. To
use it:

Clone the Boson AI Higgs GitHub repository or download the model from the Hugging Face hub.

Follow the repository instructions to install the Python
dependencies and convert the model into a format appropriate for
local inference.

The base model runs at 24 kHz and supports multiple speakers
boson.ai
aimodels.fyi
. Note
that the 3B variant requires at least an RTX 4090 for real‑time
inference
boson.ai
.

Modify the TTSGenerator class in audiobook_generator.py to call the Higgs
API or Python functions instead of using the provided stub.

6. Run the application
After installing dependencies and starting LM Studio, run the
audiobook generator from the repository root:

bash
Copy
Edit
python audiobook_generator.py
The main window will open. Click “Browse…” to choose a text or
Word document, and “Select Folder…” to set the output directory.
Choose your loaded LLM from the Model dropdown. Once you start
generation, the program will parse each chapter with the LLM and then
invoke the TTS engine to produce a .wav file for every chapter.

7. Assign voice samples (optional)
When a book is parsed, the program lists the names of all speakers.
Double‑click a speaker row to assign a reference audio clip for that
character. Higgs Audio V2 will then clone that voice when reading
dialogue
aimodels.fyi
. Assigned voices persist in voices.json, so
future books will reuse the same voices automatically.

Notes on hardware
For smooth operation, ensure you have enough GPU memory to load both
the selected LLM and the Higgs TTS model. Running both models
simultaneously may exhaust GPU memory; consider running the parsing
stage first and the TTS stage afterward.

The base Higgs model uses 24 kHz sampling for high fidelity
boson.ai
 and
may produce large files. An hour of mono 24 kHz WAV audio can take
around 350 MB; plan your disk space accordingly.

To reduce memory usage, the script synthesises audio in smaller
chunks at sentence or speaker boundaries. Avoid splitting
sentences mid‑way to maintain natural prosody
developers.deepgram.com
.

Troubleshooting
LM Studio cannot connect: verify that lms server start is
running and that your firewall allows connections on port 1234. Also
ensure you set the base_url to http://localhost:1234/v1 in the
code or environment.

“Not enough disk space” error: The program requires at least
2 GB of free space in the output directory. Free up space or
select another directory.

Silence instead of speech: The provided TTSGenerator contains
a placeholder synthesis function. Replace it with a call to your
local Higgs Audio installation as described above.

License
This project is released under the MIT License. Please review
LICENSE for details. Note that LM Studio, the selected LLM models
and the Higgs Audio models each carry their own licenses; consult
their respective sources for usage terms.